== The build process

The bulid process starts by copying (the English versions of) the
pathway directories to `distribution/en-us/courses` and the
lesson directories to `distribution/en-us/lessons`, sometimes
creating multiple versions to accommodate multiple proglangs as
needed. (The other natlang versions go the corresponding subdir
in `distribution`, e.g., `es-mx`, and their treatment follows a
similar route, with `en-us` replaced.)

===  Modifying the course directory

After copying a pathway into its course directory with fixed
proglang, the build process drills down its directories to see if
there are any proglang-specific shadowing subdirectories. These
are named for the proglang, e.g., `pyret`, `wescheme`, etc.  The
contents of the relevant proglang subdir are copied to the
containing directory. All the other proglang subdirs are deleted.
This ensures that all the files in the course directory, at
whatever depth, have content appropriate to its proglang.

Next, if a subdirectory called `pages` occurs at any level --
typically these are in the `front-matter`, `back-matter` and
`resources` subdirs --, the build ensure that a subdir called
`solution-pages` is alongside it. Furthermore, it ensures that
its contents are the same as the `pages` subdir, except for such
files that are pre-existent in it (from the repo).

Next the build looks for `workbook-pages.txt` inside these
`pages` subdirs (at any depth). A sanitized version -- removing
comments -- of this is placed in
`.cached/.workbook-pages.txt.kp`, and an even sparer version --
removing landscape/portrait information -- is placed in
`.cached/.workbook-pages-ls.txt.kp`.
